Kohli fined 20% of his match-fee, handed 1 demerit point for Konstas incident

Virat Kohli has been fined 20% of his match fee and awarded one demerit point for for shoulder bumping Sam Konstas at the MCG on Thursday morning.

Cricket is not a contact sport and there are rules for body nudging in the game. Relevant here is another set of rules in ICC's Code of Conduct (CoC). The article 2.12 of CoC reads:

"Any form of inappropriate physical contact is prohibited in cricket. Without limitation, players will breach this regulation if they deliberately, recklessly and/or negligently walk or run into or shoulder another player or umpire.

"When assessing the seriousness of the breach, the following factors (without limitation) shall be taken into account: (i) the context of the particular situation, including, without limitation, whether the contact was deliberate (i.e. intentional), reckless, negligent, and/or avoidable; (ii) the force of the contact; (iii) any resulting injury to the person with whom contact was made; and (iv) the person with whom contact was made."

The incident occurred after the end of the 10th over of Day One when Kohli was seen shoulder-nudging the debutant Australian opener in front of a 90,000-strong MCG crowd. It led to an exchange between the players with the other opener, Usman Khawaja, trying to cool things down. Kohli's act drew instant outrage with Ricky Ponting calling for sanctions against the Indian batter.

"Virat walked one whole pitch over to his right and instigated that confrontation. No doubt in my mind whatsoever. I have no doubt that the umpires and the referee will have a good look at that. Fielders should be nowhere near the batsman at that stage. Every fieldsman on the ground knows where the batsmen will congregate and get together. It looked to me that Konstas looked up really late, and wouldn't even know anyone was in front of him. That man on-screen there (Kohli) might have a few questions to answer," Ponting was quoted in Channel Seven as saying by Fox.